Christmas Logistics
===================

:date: 2014-12-21 20:47
:slug: xmas-2014
:tags: xmas, tangents

As the final hours close on the winter solstice for 2014, it is worth taking
time to reflect on the significant engineering challenge overcome by Claus et
al\. in their efforts to successfully deliver presents to all the children of
the Earth. Exactly how difficult a problem do they actually face?

According to the Population Reference Bureau, the number of children
under the age of 15 in 2014 was 26%, or 1.88 billion total [PRB2014]_. If we
guesstimate the number of households by comparing the number of children to the
total fertility rate, 2.43 children per woman [WFB2014]_, then we get
approximately 774 million households worldwide.

Phew, that's a lot of households to visit in one night, but is it just one
night?  If Sinter Klaas just follows December 25 around the globe from the
International Date Line, then he actually gets 26 hours total assuming that
presents are delivered on the stroke of midnight: from UTC+14 in Kiritimati_
(Christmas Island) in the Line Island atolls of Kiribati to UTC-12 in the
`Howland and Baker Islands`_, the last place of the day `Anywhere on Earth`_.
Howland and Baker are unfortunately uninhabited at the moment, so 25 hours to
the children of American Samoa in UTC-11 will have to do.

Is it feasible then to visit every household? Not by riding a reindeer-drawn
sleigh across snowfields, and at 110µs per household even teleportation would
leave little time to actually pick out presents from a Sack of Holding. An
orbital approach be more appropriate, given that a low Earth orbit has a period
of almost 90 minutes the team could only complete 16 orbits around the globe in
that time. Passing through the poles for orbital restocking and refueling and to
limit the amount of steering needed, only half the time is spent in useful night
the surface of the Earth would be divided into 16 lunes of 31.9 million km\
:superscript:`2`, each one to have all of its presents delivered in 45 minutes.

High-flying reindeer still smack of being quite intractable, which leaves but
one plausible solution: Saint Nicholas is the avatar of a highly advanced, yet
whimsical, civilisation with technology at least several centuries beyond us
judging by their application of desktop molecular assembly in households around
the world since at least the `4th century CE`_. We should be thankful that these
immensely powerful aliens with their panopticon-like surveillance:

    |   He sees you when you're sleeping,
    |   He knows when you're awake.
    |   He knows if you've been bad or good,
    |   So be good for goodness' sake!
    |
    |   —*Santa Claus is Coming To Town*, John Frederick Coots and Haven
        Gillespie 

seek only to reward children for adhering to a fairly benign moral code of
"being good". Pray that this is all that they demand.

.. [PRB2014] 2014 World Population Data Sheet, Population Reference Bureau
    http://www.prb.org/pdf14/2014-world-population-data-sheet_eng.pdf

.. [WFB2014] The CIA World Factbook, 2014
    https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/fields/2127.html

.. _Kiritimati: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kiritimati
.. _`Howland and Baker Islands`: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Howland_and_Baker_islands
.. _`Anywhere on Earth`: http://www.ieee802.org/16/aoe.html
.. _`4th century CE`: http://www.stnicholascenter.org/pages/who-is-st-nicholas/

